{
  "id": 9,
  "name": "Science Textbook Class 7",
  "prompt": [
    "Provide concise, engaging, and insightful summaries (15-25 words) for chapters from Science Textbook Class 7 by NCERT. Highlight key scientific concepts, experiments, and practical applications. Include questions to foster critical thinking and curiosity among students. These are the contents of the book - 1. Nutrition in Plants: Discuss autotrophic and heterotrophic nutrition in plants, emphasizing photosynthesis and nutrient uptake. 2. Nutrition in Animals: Explore the digestive system and nutritional requirements of different animals.3. Fibre to Fabric: Learn about the process of obtaining and using natural and synthetic fibers.4. Heat: Understand heat transfer methods and their implications in daily life.5. Acids, Bases and Salts: Highlight the properties and reactions of acids, bases, and salts.6. Physical and Chemical Changes: Differentiate between physical and chemical changes with examples.7. Weather, Climate and Adaptations: Examine animal adaptations to different climates and meteorological concepts.8. Winds, Storms and Cyclones: Understand the formation and impact of cyclones and storms.9. Soil: Learn about soil types, formation, and importance in agriculture.10. Respiration in Organisms: Focus on aerobic and anaerobic respiration across organisms.11. Transportation in Animals and Plants: Discuss circulatory and transport systems in living beings.12. Reproduction in Plants: Analyze modes of reproduction in plants, including asexual and sexual methods.13. Motion and Time: Explore motion types and time measurement with experiments.14. Electric Current and its Effects: Highlight basic electrical circuits and safety precautions.15. Light: Learn about reflection, refraction, and basic optics.16. Water: A Precious Resource: Emphasize the importance of water conservation and scarcity solutions.17. Forests: Our Lifeline: Discuss the ecological importance of forests and biodiversity.18. Wastewater Story: Focus on sanitation, wastewater management, and its treatment.",
    "उत्तर हिंदी में दें। बहुत संक्षिप्त, रोचक और जानकारीपूर्ण (15-25 शब्द)। एनसीईआरटी कक्षा 7 की विज्ञान पाठ्यपुस्तक के अध्यायों पर चर्चा करें। मुख्य वैज्ञानिक अवधारणाओं, प्रयोगों और व्यावहारिक अनुप्रयोगों पर प्रकाश डालें। छात्रों में आलोचनात्मक सोच और जिज्ञासा को बढ़ावा देने वाले प्रश्न शामिल करें। यह पुस्तक के विषय निम्नलिखित हैं:पौधों में पोषण: पौधों में स्वपोषी और परपोषी पोषण की चर्चा करें, जिसमें प्रकाश-संश्लेषण और पोषक तत्वों का अवशोषण शामिल है।पशुओं में पोषण: विभिन्न पशुओं की पाचन प्रणाली और पोषण आवश्यकताओं का अध्ययन करें।रेशे से वस्त्र तक: प्राकृतिक और कृत्रिम रेशों को प्राप्त करने और उपयोग करने की प्रक्रिया जानें।ऊष्मा: ऊष्मा के स्थानांतरण के तरीकों और उनके दैनिक जीवन में प्रभाव को समझें।अम्ल, क्षार और लवण: अम्ल, क्षार और लवण के गुणों और उनकी प्रतिक्रियाओं पर प्रकाश डालें।भौतिक और रासायनिक परिवर्तन: उदाहरणों के साथ भौतिक और रासायनिक परिवर्तनों के बीच अंतर करें।मौसम, जलवायु और अनुकूलन: विभिन्न जलवायु और मौसम संबंधी अवधारणाओं के लिए जानवरों के अनुकूलन की जांच करें।हवा, तूफान और चक्रवात: चक्रवातों और तूफानों के निर्माण और प्रभाव को समझें।मिट्टी: मिट्टी के प्रकार, निर्माण और कृषि में इसके महत्व को जानें।जीवों में श्वसन: विभिन्न जीवों में एरोबिक और एनारोबिक श्वसन पर ध्यान दें।पशुओं और पौधों में परिवहन: जीवों में संचलन और परिवहन प्रणालियों की चर्चा करें।पौधों में प्रजनन: पौधों में प्रजनन के तरीके, जिसमें अलैंगिक और लैंगिक विधियां शामिल हैं, का विश्लेषण करें।गति और समय: गति के प्रकार और प्रयोगों के साथ समय मापन का अध्ययन करें।विद्युत धारा और इसके प्रभाव: बुनियादी विद्युत सर्किट और सुरक्षा उपायों पर प्रकाश डालें।प्रकाश: परावर्तन, अपवर्तन और मौलिक प्रकाशिकी के बारे में जानें।पानी: एक मूल्यवान संसाधन: जल संरक्षण और कमी के समाधान पर जोर दें।जंगल: हमारी जीवन रेखा: जंगलों और जैव विविधता के पारिस्थितिक महत्व पर चर्चा करें।गंदे पानी की कहानी: स्वच्छता, गंदे पानी के प्रबंधन और इसके उपचार पर ध्यान दें। "
  ],
  "imglink": "https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcR4m8p7vPpRHQ6A_raJEc9TnS__NEswr0PfNw&s.png",
  "title": "Science Textbook Class 7",
  "author": "NCERT",
  "publisher": "National Council of Educational Research and Training",
  "exam": "CBSE",
  "subject": "Science",
  "description": "A comprehensive textbook covering scientific principles, experiments, and their real-life applications for Class 7 students.",
  "price": 250.00,
  "language": "English",
  "isbn": "978-8174505081",
  "publicationDate": "2020-01-01"
}
